# **Troop 54 - Handbook**

Adapted by Troop 54 in 2019 and updated last in 2023. Copyright ©
2002‐2014 Troop 55 - Houston. Text from this Handbook may be further
adapted by other Scout organizations; attribution to "Troop 55, Houston"
is appreciated.


## Fast Facts About Troop 54

**Introduction**

These Fast Facts are from our Troop Handbook, we strongly encourage you
to browse through the Handbook.

**\"A game with a purpose\"**

Lord Baden‐Powell, founder of the Scouting movement, famously said that
\"Scouting is a game with a purpose.\" In the words of Troop 54\'s
mission statement, we view that purpose as helping Scouts (i) grow into
\"responsible, compassionate, self‐reliant citizens of God\'s world\"
who live by the Scout Oath and Scout Law, and (ii) have a lot of fun in
the process. We place great emphasis on having a \"Scout‐led\" Troop.

Troop 54 serves girls aged 11 to 17. As with most average size scout
troops, we expect to have between 30 to 60 registered Scouts organized
into small patrols. **Our Scouts are expected to attend many different
public and private schools and come from a variety of faiths.**

**Whom to contact**

A *Scout\'s* first point of contact with questions, concerns, etc.,
should always be her Patrol Leader, or failing that, her Patrol
Assistant Scoutmaster (\"PASM\"). A *parent\'s* first point of contact
should be his or her daughter\'s PASM or, if a problem persists, the
Scoutmaster. (The Scoutmaster is usually ***very*** busy on Troop
meeting nights, so if possible, please pick another time to speak to him
about your daughter\'s advancement, etc.) For all summer camps, the
single designated Scout Master / Trek Leader / Campmaster for that camp
from Troop 54 is a *parent\'s* first point contact for issues related to
that trip. If you need further help, contact the Troop Committee Chair.

**Use of email**

Troop 54 makes heavy use of email; addresses and other contact
information is taken from ScoutBook and also made available on the Troop
54 website. Therefore, it is important to keep contact information of
all registered participants up-to-date in ScoutBook.

**Uniforms**

See the Uniforms section in this Troop Handbook. Uniform items and other
Scouting items can be purchased at the Scout Shop, on the southeast
corner of the North Loop (inside the loop) and East T.C. Jester, 2225 N
Loop W. For placement of **patches**, see the BSA\'s official Insignia
Guide on the Web.

**Troop meetings**

The Troop\'s weekly meetings are on most Monday nights during the school
year, at 7:00 pm in the Scout Room at The Church of St. John the Divine
(Episcopal), our chartered organization at 2450 River Oaks Blvd. Scouts
are NOT required to attend every weekly Troop meeting, but more is
better. Our meetings are run by the Scouts themselves, with discreet
coaching by adult leaders only when needed; that means meetings may seem
chaotic.

**Campouts**

The Troop plans to go on at least three weekend campouts each semester
during the school year, as part of an annual program that is planned and
executed by the Scouts themselves. The equipment list in the online
Troop Handbook will give you an idea what you will need to buy for your
Scout.

**Summer camp**

We also plan to go to summer camp at some awesome places, from
merit‐badge camps for all Scouts and to high adventure camps for the
more‐experienced ones. See the online Troop Handbook for examples.
Summer camp is not mandatory, but it is highly encouraged -- Scouts have
a ton of fun, earn advancement and merit badges, and literally grow up
at summer camp. With Scoutmaster approval, we welcome adults who are
willing to go to summer camp as Assistant Scoutmasters; they must take
the required training. ￼

**Advancement; merit badges**

Scouts advance in rank at their own pace by completing the requirements
for each applicable rank (see the Scout Handbook for details). The Troop
plans to do a lot of organized advancement activities; see generally the
Advancement and Merit Badge sections of the online Troop Handbook for
more information.

**Registering with Troop 54**

Girls between the ages of 11 and 17 (inclusive) may join Troop 54. Cub
Scouts girls who have completed the Arrow of Light (or completed the
5^th^ grade) may join the Troop at age 10. See the Troop Website for a
list of forms that you and your Scout will need to complete
(<http://troop54houston.org/registration.html>).

**What Troop 54 provides**

The Troop provides each new Scout who has paid her dues with an
embroidered Troop 54 neckerchief and slide, a Scout Handbook, handbook
cover, unit number, and personalized name tag. All other personal gear
is the responsibility of the Scout and her parents. The Troop furnishes
each patrol with a stove, propane, cooking gear, a dining fly, and a
lantern owned by St. John the Divine (SJD). SJD also owns a fleet of
canoes, a troop trailer as well as other scout gear, that Troop 54
shares with Troop 55.

**Dues and expenses**

Dues are \$196 per year per Scout. This covers the annual BSA
registration fee (\$80, and the premium for BSA provided insurance
(\$6), both paid directly to BSA and billed by BSA on an annual basis.
This also includes the Troop operating fee (\$110) paid every calendar
year to the Troop on the online store
([[[<https://shop.troop54houston.org/>](https://shop.troop54houston.org/)](https://shop.troop54houston.org/)](https://shop.troop54houston.org/)).
New scouts pay an additional \$65 to the Troop to cover a T-54
neckerchief, handbook, and other items upon joining. New scouts also pay
an additional \$25 joining fee to BSA when initially joining. Registered
adult leaders are required to pay the BSA annual fees for registered
adult leaders of \$66. In addition to dues, each Scout should expect to
pay approximately the following: Uniform: \$80. Campouts: \$20 per
campout for food, plus \$10 to \$15 per campout for travel meals,
spending money, and sometimes \$20‐65 for bus transportation (special
activities such as canoeing, boating, shooting, etc., will have
additional costs). Summer camp: Typically, \$400 to \$700 for a week of
merit‐badge summer camp (**excluding transportation**). High‐adventure
camps for older Scouts normally will cost more. 

**Financial assistance**

Scouts have opportunities to earn some or all their dues and expenses by
participating in Troop fundraising activities; in addition, scholarships
may also be available (see the Scholarship section of this handbook for
more details).

**Special needs Scouts**

Make the Scoutmaster and your Scout\'s PASM aware of your daughter\'s
special needs.

**Troop Committee**

The Troop 54 Committee meets the second Thursday of each month (except
June & July) at 6:00 pm virtually (using Zoom or similar tools), subject
to change. All parents of scouts and Adult leaders are encouraged to
attend.

**Adult involvement**

We need YOU! As with any troop, the \"official\" adult leaders can\'t
possibly do it all. We have both \"outdoor\" and \"indoor\" adult jobs.
We\'re friendly and supportive, we\'ll train you, and we absolutely,
positively guarantee you\'ll have a great time. Experience shows that,
**the more involved a Scout\'s parent is in the Troop\'s adult
leadership**, the more likely the Scout is to remain in Scouting and
someday **earn the rank of Eagle Scout.**

**\
**

## Active Participation

The advancement requirements for each of the Scout ranks (as set forth
in the Scout Handbook) includes some requirement that the Scout be
active in her troop and patrol. The BSA Guide to Advancement defines
that "Active Participation" requires that:

1\. The Scout is registered.

2\. The Scout is in good standing.

3\. The Scout meets the unit's reasonable expectations; or, if not, a
lesser level of activity is explained.

Set forth below are a set of guidelines outlining Troop 54's reasonable
expectations for participation These guidelines articulate a minimum set
of expectations for Active Participation.

As outlined in the Guide to Advancement, if a Scout falls below these
minimum expectations, a special Board of Review will decide whether the
Scout meets the requirement of participation in order to advance.

**[Troop 54's minimum expectations for active
participation:]{.underline}**

-   For advancement to Scout, Tenderfoot, Second Class and First Class,
    active participation is specifically defined in the Scout Handbook.
    For example, for Second Class, a Scout must, "since joining, have
    participated in five separate troop/patrol activities (other than
    troop/patrol meetings), at least three must be held outdoors."
    Possible troop/patrol activities include, e.g., Campouts,
    Advancement Sessions, Courts of Honor and Service Projects, and are
    signed off by the Scout's PASM. Troop Activities does not include a
    merit badge class, or Cub Scout Pack or Den activity.

-   For advancement to Star, Life and Eagle, the Scout Handbook requires
    more broadly that the Scout "be active in \[her\] unit (and patrol
    if \[she is\] in one) for at least \[X number of\] months as a
    \[Prior Rank\] Scout."

To satisfy this requirement, a Scout must:

-   For each month (or a 30‐day period/month equivalent) being counted,
    attend at least two "Troop Activities" during the month (or 30‐day
    period/month equivalent). Troop Activities can include Troop
    Meetings, Service Projects, First Class Trail and other Advancement
    Sessions, or Troop outdoor activities such as a climbing session or
    canoeing outing; Troop Activities does not include a merit badge
    class, Court of Honor, or Venture Crew/Cub Scout Pack or Den
    activity.

-   In at least half of the months being counted, attend one Overnight
    Outdoor Activity. An Overnight Outdoor Activity includes, e.g., the
    Troop's monthly weekend campouts but does not include Cub Scout Pack
    or Venture Crew campouts. Attending an Overnight Outdoor Activity
    requires the Scout's presence and participation at the bulk of the
    activity/campout and must include staying overnight. Camping both
    Friday and Saturday night on a weekend campout constitutes one event
    (not two).

    -   For Star, this would require 2 Overnight Outdoor Activities, and
        for Life and Eagle would require 3 Overnight Outdoor Activities
        each.

-   During each rank period (First Class to Star; Star to Life, and Life
    to Eagle), attend at least one Troop Court of Honor.

-   During the period from First Class thru Eagle, at least one of the
    Overnight Outdoor Activities must include participation in a
    long-term Troop 54 summer camp, NYLT or NAYLE.

-   Note: Regarding Summer Camp: Participation in a week‐long summer
    camp, NYLT or NAYLE (including participation as Staff) will satisfy
    both the Troop Activity and Overnight Outdoor Activity for a
    one‐month equivalent.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For Eagle Palms, to satisfy this Active Participation requirement, a
    Scout must:

    -   Attend at least 2 Troop Activities during the month (or 30‐day
        month equivalent) she is counting. Troop Activities can include
        Troop Meetings, Service Projects, First Class Trail and other
        Advancement Sessions, or Troop outdoor activities such as a
        weekend campout, climbing session or canoeing outing; Troop
        Activities does not include a merit badge class, Court of Honor,
        or Venture Crew/Cub Scout Pack or Den activity.

-   NOTES:

    -   The months for active participation need not be contiguous.

    -   It is the Scout's responsibility to ensure she has signed in
        with her Patrol Leader, ASPL, or Adult Leader to be counted as
        participating. The Patrol Leader, ASPL, or Adult Leader is
        responsible for turning in the attendance roster to the Troop
        Attendance Chair who will enter the participation into ScoutBook
        for tracking and advancement.

-   These guidelines do not address the completion of leadership
    requirements for advancement to Star, Life, and Eagle.

## Adult Leader Registration

Adults wishing to serve in any leadership capacity in Troop 54 must
register as BSA adult leaders. The BSA registration application is
available online at <https://beascout.scouting.org>/. The application
requires the applicant\'s Social Security number as well as contact
information for three references. It also includes a mandatory
authorization for the Sam Houston Area Council to conduct a criminal
background check. The Troop Committee Chair and the Troop\'s Chartered
Organization Representative are each required by BSA policy to review
and approve all adult‐leader registration applications. BSA policy
requires completion of Youth Protection Training (\"YPT\") with each new
adult registration application. Registered adult leaders are required to
pay the BSA annual fees for registered adult leaders of \$66.

## Adult Leader Training

Troop 54 strongly encourages all parents to take the Scout leader basic
training courses listed in the BSA document, \"What Makes a Trained
Leader.\" This training helps all parents understand and assist in
achieving the Troop\'s program and goals. NOTE: Youth Protection
Training (YPT), which is one of these introductory courses, is
**required** for all registered adult volunteers and especially any
adult leader having direct contact with Scouts. YPT can be taken either
online or in person.

The BSA's Guide to Safe Scouting has a good summary of its
youth‐protection guidelines. (Parents would also benefit from taking the
Troop Committee Member Position Specific online training.) All but two
of these introductory courses can be taken online in about 30 minutes to
1 hour each. The one exception is Introduction to Outdoor Leader Skills
(or IOLS) which is in-person/overnight training, and required for, the
Scoutmaster and all Assistant Scoutmasters.

## Advancement

**General advancement information**

See the Scout Handbook for the specific requirements to advance to each
rank; those requirements are also available at the MeritBadge.org Web
site. See also the BSA Guide to Advancement and the Advancement Policies
handbook at MeritBadge.org. Scouting\'s advancement program is a
*self‐paced* program. Parents should familiarize themselves with the
advancement program, but it is essential that parents step back and
allow their Scout to

experience and learn from the safe failures, recoveries, and successes
of the advancement program.

**Advancement: The Scout\'s responsibility**

Each Scout should set a specific target date for a Scoutmaster
conference and then a board of review for her next rank, then **work
backwards** from that final target date to set interim target dates for
completing the various requirements. Scouts are responsible for keeping
track of their own progress, setting their advancement goals,

and designing their own course and pace. The adult leaders and parents
will encourage them, but success or failure is up to the Scout herself.
Each Scout can check her advancement status through the approvals in her
own Scout Handbook and on the Troop Web site,
[www.troop54.org](http://www.troop54.org).

A Scout should follow these basic procedures for advancing in rank:

1\. Meet the requirements for the advancement or award; have all
required spaces in her Scout Handbook signed by the appropriate adult
leader(s). Unlike Cub Scouts, **parents do not sign off on their
daughters\' advancement work.**

2\. Make an appointment for a Scoutmaster conference. *The Scout herself
should do this, not the parent.*

3\. Ask the Board of Review Coordinator, Advancement Chair or the Troop
Committee Chair to schedule a board of review. *The Scout herself should
do this, not the parent.* When a Scout completes a requirement for rank
advancement or a merit badge, it\'s her responsibility to make sure that
her book (or merit‐badge card) is signed off by her PASM (or merit‐badge
counselor). When a Scout advances to the next rank or completes a merit
badge, the Advancement Chair records that in our electronic database. If
a Scout completes a \"partial\" on a merit badge, that too will be
recorded in our database. But to repeat, it is the Scout\'s
responsibility to make sure this happens.

**Advancement timetable (suggested)**

Although the Scout advancement program is self‐paced, the following is
Troop 54\'s suggested time frame for minimum time and experience for
rank advancement.

**First Class:** 9 to 12 months active; one summer camp.

**Star:** 12‐36 months active; two camps (summer camp or National Youth
Leadership Training)

**Life:** 3+ years active; two camps (summer camp or National Youth
Leader Training) and one high adventure camp

A Scout who regularly and actively participates in Troop 54 activities
should be able to advance to First Class rank during her first 9 to 12
months in the Troop.

## Boards of Review

In Troop 54, each Scout must personally contact the Board of Review
Coordinator, Advancement Chair, or the Troop Committee Chair to arrange
a time for a board of review, except for her board of review for the
Eagle Rank. *(A board of review for Eagle rank is scheduled by the
Troop's Chief Eagle Advisor after the Sam Houston Area Council has
approved the Scout\'s Eagle Application. One member of the Eagle board
of review must be a representative of the Twin Bayou District from
outside the Troop.)* All parents are encouraged to participate as
members of boards of review, and can do so without any training. The
Troop 54 board of review report form has sample \'interview\' questions
on the back.

Another excellent source of questions is \"A Guide to Conducting Boards
of Review\" by Ray Klaus. This is a good way for you to meet other
parents and find out things that are going on at campouts and troop
meetings. *(Some parents complain that the extent of dialogue following
a campout is something like this:*

*Q: \"How was the campout?\" A: \"Fine.\" Participating in boards of
review will help you know what is happening.)*

For an overview of how to conduct a board of review, see \"Boards of
Review\" at MeritBadge.org, based on the BSA publication Advancement
Committee Policies and Procedures, ##33088B. Some key points:

A board of review cannot be conducted until the Scoutmaster conference
for that rank has been completed.

A board of review is made up of at least three and not more than six
members of the Troop Committee. ￼

The Scout must present herself at the scheduled time *with her Scout
Handbook properly signed* for the requirements for rank to which she is
advancing. The Scout should be *in full \"Class A\" uniform.* Unless
excused because of other circumstances approved by Scoutmaster or Board
of Review chair. *The review is not an examination; the board does not
re‐test the candidate.* The Scout should be asked where she learned her
skill, who taught her, and the value she gained from passing this
requirement. The Scoutmaster, the Scout\'s PASMs, and the Scout\'s
relatives and guardians *may not serve* as members of her board of
review.

• The decision of the board of review is arrived at through discussion
and must be unanimous.

• The chair of the board of review fills out a Board of Review Report
Form and gives it to the Troop Committee Chair or Advancement Chair.

## Scout Handbook

The Troop provides each new Scout with a Scout Handbook; if it gets
lost, the Scout must purchase a replacement at the Scout Shop at her own
expense. Each Scout should safeguard her Handbook by (i) clearly marking
her name on the outside, and (ii) protecting it from \"the elements,\"
for example, with a cover available for purchase at the

Scout Shop. The Handbook contains a wealth of practical information
needed for advancement. Each Scout should carefully study the relevant
section(s) of the Handbook when working on rank advancement.

A Scout\'s advancement is recorded in the pages at the back of her
Handbook. *Each Scout is responsible* for asking the Scoutmaster (or
his/her assistants) to sign her Handbook as soon as she completes any
requirement. Even though advancement data is entered into the Troop\'s
electronic Scoutbook.com database, **the Scout\'s Handbook is the
official and primary advancement record** and should be safeguarded in
case of database problems**.** Before each campout or advancement
session a Scout should photocopy all signed advancement pages of her
Handbook in case the Handbook gets lost.

## Buddy system (activities)

The buddy system for Scout activities is very simple: *Never leave your
buddy nor let her leave you.* If the buddy system is good enough for
Navy SEALs, it\'s good enough for us. The buddy system should be used:

• for all water activities;

• when outside immediate camp area; or

• if separating from the main group when traveling.

If you get caught without your buddy at a \"buddy check,\" there will be
consequences. For example, if you are swimming, both you and your buddy
will have to get out of the water for a while. The buddy system for
merit badge work is slightly different; see that section for more
details.

## Campouts

**Troop 54\'s weekend campout program**

The Troop camps at least three times per semester (in addition to summer
camps). Each campout is organized around a program theme, for example:

• Canoeing and kayaking in the Hill Country, lakes, and the San Marcos
and Guadalupe Rivers.

• Backpacking and climbing at Enchanted Rock, plus an in‐town lock‐in at
Texas Rock Gym.

• Shooting at Camp Strake with shotguns, BB guns, .22 rifles.

**Campout transportation**

The Troop expects to travel to all campouts via buses or vans leaving
from St John's on Friday around 4:45 pm. For campouts that are one to
two hours away we will usually take school buses or vans. For longer
trips, such as Enchanted Rock, we often charter a coach bus. The cost
for transportation is included in the campout signup. *Adult drivers are
strongly encouraged to take as many Scouts with them as possible*
(always observing the two‐deep rule for youth protection). Per the Guide
to Safe Scouting, we do not travel in convoys. The Troop trailers are
pulled by an adult driver.

**Campout food (\"grub\")**

Both Scouts and adults (the \"Goat Patrol\") cook by patrols. Each
patrol\'s designated grubmaster for the campout is responsible for
planning the weekend menu, buying food, and supervising the cooking.
Goats should plan to model good camping practices by cooking foods that
Scouts could cook with their standard patrol gear. If a Scout or adult
signs up for a campout and food is purchased, the Scout or adult is
responsible for the grub fee even if he or she ends up not attending the
campout. **TIP:** Before your new Scout\'s first campout, have her do
some cooking **and clean‐up** at home (ideally, together with her
patrol); that will make it easier for her (or them) to cook and clean up
at their first campout.

**Campout jobs**

Everyone works at a campout, Scouts and adults alike. Each Patrol Leader
designates individual Scouts to be in charge of planning patrol menus,
collecting money, arranging transportation, preparing equipment, buying
food (\"grubmaster\"), cooking and clean up. Every patrol, including the
Goats, should have a duty roster covering the entire campout weekend.

**Campout schedule**

The typical schedule for campouts is approximately as follows:

• **Friday night:** Arrive at the campsite, set up camp, have a snack
(\"cracker barrel\").

• **Saturday:** Breakfast. Morning activities. Lunch. Afternoon
activities. Free time / advancement work. Dinner. Campfire.

• **Sunday:** Breakfast. Scout's Own chapel service. Break camp: clean
up patrol equipment; inspection and stowage of patrol equipment. Clean
sweep of the campsite. Depart for home.

**Camping equipment**

Each Scout is responsible for her personal gear; see the list of
recommended personal gear. Troop 54 provides shared patrol gear,
including lanterns, stoves and cooking equipment, for each patrol. A
Patrol Quartermaster (Patrol QM) (who is a Scout) is responsible for her
patrol\'s cooking gear (action packer) on each campout. Generally, that
Scout will bring home this gear from the Troop meeting the Monday before
the campout. The Patrol QM should check for missing items, and clean the
gear if needed. The Patrol QM will also return home with this gear after
the campout. She should clean it thoroughly and restock the action
packer before returning it to the Scout closet at the following

meeting. *(Patrol members should help clean up patrol gear* **before**
*leaving the campout.)* No food should be left in the patrol equipment
box between campouts.

**Campout rules**

The following rules apply to all Scouts and adults. The Scout Oath and
Scout Law govern everyone in camp, including both Scouts and adults, at
all times.

**Sign‐ups:** Everyone, Scouts and Adults, must be signed up in advance
to attend any campout. (How to sign up will be announced at Troop
meetings or by Troop newsletter or e‐mail.) **Just showing up at camp or
at the departure point is not acceptable.**

**Uniform requirements:** Scout and adult leaders are to wear their
Field (Class A) uniform to and from the campout and to flags. Scouts
should wear the Activity (Class B) uniform for the remaining time,
except for sleeping or activities that require different attire. *See
the Uniform section on this Handbook for more details*

**Camping is by patrols:** At campouts, patrol members camp together in
the location designated for their patrol. Sharing of tents by Scouts
within a patrol is encouraged. **Adults do not share tents with Scouts,
including their own daughters, and generally avoid the area of their own
daughter\'s patrol.** Adults (the \"Goat Patrol\") ordinarily will camp
in their own designated campsite. On some occasions, two to three adults
(PASMs) will be assigned to camp with each Scout patrol, but not with
the patrols of their own daughters.

**Stay out of other patrols\' areas:** Scouts should request permission
before entering another patrol\'s campsite. Adults should request
permission before entering any Scout patrol site (except that patrol\'s
PASMs, who camp with the patrol). Adults should discourage Scouts from
being in the Goat area unless they have a specific need to be there.

**Hands off:** Don\'t touch someone else\'s equipment, tent, or
belongings, unless you have the owner\'s prior permission.

**Everyone works:** All Scouts and adults are expected to do their share
of patrol duties in accordance with the duty roster.

**Keep the campsite squared away:** All campers are to continually keep
shipshape their tents, personal gear, and patrol‐ and troop gear. The
entire Troop assembles for a \"clean sweep\" of the camping area at the
end of each campout.

**Fire safety:** Scouts may build and light ground fires (cooking and
campfires) only *when* and *where* authorized by the Scoutmaster, Patrol
Assistant Scoutmaster, or the Campmaster. No unauthorized fires are
permitted. Fire safety rules will be strictly enforced. *A fire must
never be left unattended.*

**No electronic equipment, liquid fuels or other prohibited items.** The
use of liquid fuels by Scouts or Goats for starting any type of fire is
**prohibited**. EXCEPTION*:* If the Scoutmaster has previously
authorized the use of backpacking stoves at a campout, liquid fuel will
be dispensed and re‐collected by the quartermaster or his/her designee
at the campout. No Scout or Goat except the quartermaster or his
designee shall travel to or from a campout with liquid fuel in a
backpacking stove tank. (See also the list of prohibited items and
**Mobile Communication Device Policy**)

**No flames in or near tents.** No fires or open flames (including
stoves, lanterns or propane bottles) are allowed in or near tents.

**Buddy system.** The buddy system is simple: Never leave your buddy nor
let her leave you.

**Vehicle rules.** Keep vehicles out of the campsite at all times,
including when loading and unloading Scouts, adults and their personal
gear, except as specifically authorized by the Campmaster. Leave cars in
the designated parking areas.

**Water‐safety rules.** Scouts and Goats are to follow Safety Afloat and
Safe Swim Defense procedures and policies at all times for all water
activities. All Scouts and adults must take the standard BSA swim test
to determine how they can participate in aquatic activities.

**Hazardous Weather:** during a campout a unit may experience hazardous
weather situations including thunderstorms, flash floods, excessive
heat, ice, and/or snowstorms. To mitigate the risk of such situations,
the Scoutmaster and/or Campmaster will adjust plans and activities as
necessary and as prescribed by BSA's Hazardous Weather training (which
is required for all Assistant Scoutmasters and Scoutmasters).

**Lights Out:** All Scouts are to be inside their tents at 10 pm (or
otherwise at the Scoutmaster\'s or Campmaster\'s discretion). Lights
will be out and talking will stop by 10:30 pm. No Scout should leave her
tent (except for brief trips to the latrine or to report illness or
other emergency) until reveille the next morning.

**No fighting, hazing, harassment, or excessive roughhousing:** There
will be no hazing or harassing (physical or verbal) of any kind.
Fighting, hitting, wrestling, or rough horseplay are not permitted. A
Scout will not put herself or another Scout in physical danger.

**No early departures unless excused:** Scouts are strongly encouraged
to attend the entire campout. Scouts may not leave the immediate camp
area without the express permission of the Scoutmaster or Campmaster,
and must check out with the Campmaster just before departure. Unless a
Scout has an urgent need to leave early, and has been excused by the
Senior Patrol Leader (SPL) and Scoutmaster, all Scouts are to remain in
camp until dismissed by their Patrol Leader after the Troop\'s \"clean
sweep\" of the campsite.

**No alcoholic beverages** (it\'s BSA policy) **or illegal drugs**
(it\'s the law). **Tobacco** **use** by adults is strongly discouraged
(it\'s BSA policy), and by Scouts is **prohibited** (it\'s the law).

**No non‐Troop** **54 siblings / youth:** Non‐Scout siblings are not
welcome on campouts. Their presence tends to detract from the program
focus and undermine enforcement of campout rules.

**Consequences** of failing to abide by the camp and Troop rules may
include time‐outs, extra work detail, calls home, *being sent home*, or
in severe cases being suspended or even expelled from the Troop*.*
Parents may be required to travel to camp at their expense and take a
Scout home who fails to abide by the Troop and camp rules. A warning
system will be in effect for minor inappropriate behavior problems.
Consequences will be assigned as warranted. The most severe consequences
may be assigned directly without assignment of less‐severe consequences
first. In the case of a situation requiring disciplinary action, only
the Scoutmaster or single designated Trek Leader / Campmaster for a
summer camp should be having those discussions with the Scout and/or
their Parent(s). The Troop Committee Chair may be included, as
necessary.

**\
**

## Campout personal gear

Scouts should strive to bring the **minimum** gear necessary to a
campout, and to pack it so that all gear can be carried by the Scout to
her patrol\'s campsite in a **single** trip. Print out the list below
and use it as a checklist for each campout. The Scout Handbook also has
helpful information on camping and camping gear, especially its list of
Outdoor Essentials that should be taken on any hike or other activity.

􀂅 Scout Handbook for advancement work (make a photocopy of all
advancement pages that have signatures; leave the photocopy home in case
the Handbook gets lost)

􀂅 Scout uniform --wear the Field (Class A) uniform it to and from the
campout and at flags; wear the Activity (Class B) uniform the rest of
the time

􀂅 Sleeping bag --- should be \"backpackable,\" with a stuff sack, and
sufficient for 20‐degree weather, e.g., at Enchanted Rock

􀂅 Ground pad for sleeping bag, or inflatable Thermarest®

􀂅 Backpack (internal‐ or external frame)

􀂅 Tent (no larger than 2‐ or 3‐person size). May be shared, but only
with a Scout in the same patrol.

􀂅 Groundcloth for tent

􀂅 Water bottle(s) or Camelbak®‐type water sack with drinking tube (sized
to carry a minimum of 2 liters)

􀂅 Reusable cup, plate/bowl, knife, fork and spoon -- the Troop does not
use paper plates, plastic utensils, etc., except on rare occasions

􀂅 Folding knife (up to 4\" blade; no sheath knives)

􀂅 Sturdy rain jacket and pants --- ponchos do not provide sufficient
protection, especially in wet winter weather

􀂅 Head lamp using small 2 AAA batteries (preferred) or small flashlight
(head lamps are very handy for after‐dark work in camp, e.g., pitching
tents, cooking, dishes, etc.)

􀂅 Waterproof or water-resistant boots (not typical athletic shoes or
sneakers)

􀂅 Scout Handbook, pen, notebook

􀂅 Small towel, toiletries (soap, toothbrush, non‐aerosol insect
repellent and sunscreen)

􀂅 Synthetic or wool hiking socks \*

􀂅 Synthetic t‐shirts or shirts \*

􀂅 Extra underwear, including synthetic \"long johns\" for cold‐weather
camping.\*

􀂅 Synthetic fleece jacket or pullover \*

􀂅 Synthetic pants, either fleece or nylon, with good pockets ---
zip‐offs are best \*

􀂅 A warm hat (not a baseball cap) that will shed water

􀂅 One Piece Swim suit (swim shirts, quick dry shirts or other
appropriate clothing for activity

*\* Parents please note:* Cotton clothing is a very poor choice for
camping; it\'s bulky, cold and slow to dry when wet, which can
contribute to hypothermia. Layers of quick‐drying synthetics such as
Supplex®, are much better. Polartec®, or a similar synthetic fleece, is
excellent for layering and remains warm even when wet.

Certain dangerous or disruptive items are prohibited at campouts; see
the list of prohibited items

for details.

**\
**

## Chartered organization

Scout troops do not exist in a vacuum. Every troop is sponsored by a
church or other community organization that has been granted a one‐year
charter by the Boy Scouts of America (\"BSA\"). Troop 54\'s chartered
organization is The (Episcopal) Church of **St. John the Divine**, often
referred to as \"SJD.\" The church received its first BSA charter for
boy Troop 55 shortly after the parish was established in 1939 -- the
Troop itself actually pre‐dates the parish -- and has been continuously
rechartered since that time. Troop 54 was chartered for girls in
February 2019, and first scout meetings began immediately thereafter.
**NOTE****: Scouts in Troop 54 are of many different faiths, and
membership in the Troop is not restricted to SJD parishioners.**

The **Chartered Organization Representative** is a member of the
chartered organization designated by its head to serve as a liaison
between the chartered organization and its Scouting units.

## Courts of Honor

Advancement is recognized at a formal Troop Court of Honor held
periodically throughout the year. The Court of Honor provides an
opportunity for Scouts to be acknowledged for their work. At a Court of
Honor, each advancing Scout will receive a card for each rank
advancement and merit badge. This proves receipt of the award --- if
other records are lost or incorrect, these cards could be the Scout\'s
last‐resort way of verifying her advancement. It\'s a good idea to
collect and store these cards in a safe place in the unlikely event of
other records being lost or incomplete.

Families are strongly encouraged to attend as the Court of Honor is a
special occasion. In the case of higher ranks, parents are asked to
stand with their Scout as she receives her rank award.

## Expense reimbursement

The Scoutmaster, Assistant Scoutmaster, Troop Committee members, and
other volunteers who have or will extend personal funds for Scout
activities, and expect to receive reimbursement for those funds, must
know that such funds are: 1) to be within the established budget which
is approved in the fall of each year or; 2) approved by the Troop
treasurer, Scoutmaster and/or Troop Committee Chairman as funds which
are available, but which are not so budgeted. This means that
Campmasters who have responsibility for monthly camping activities,
summer camps, or other such activities must project costs and assess
participants for the expenses associated with that specific activity in
order to not exceed any budgeted funds which may be available from the
Troop Committee. Campmasters for summer camps are expected to create a
budget and collect sufficient assessments from the participants so that
the entire activity will be self‐supporting. Otherwise, those who spend
personal funds on Troop programs do so at the risk that they might not
be fully reimbursed.

## Fundraising

**Popcorn sales and Scout Fair ticket sales**

The sale of BSA popcorn in the fall and Scout Fair tickets in the spring
provides important fundraising for the Scouting program. Troop 54
expects to receive approximately 30% of the proceeds of such sales.
Troop 54 then credits the funds back to the Scout who sold the popcorn
or tickets, and such credits are used to offset future fees for summer
camps. Thus, participation in the popcorn and ticket sales provides each
Scout with a way to earn some or all of her camp expenses.

**Friends of Scouting annual campaign**

Troop 54 will participate in this fundraising campaign each winter to
support the Sam Houston Area Council (\"SHAC\"). Contributions are
entirely voluntary but strongly encouraged. None of a Scout\'s troop
dues goes to SHAC. For many years, parents and friends of Troop 55 have
generated larger contributions than any other troop in the Twin Bayou
District. Troop 54 will be justly proud of its philanthropic culture of
supporting Scouting in the Houston area.

##  Goat Patrol

At campouts and Troop meetings, all adults present, other than the
Scoutmaster and Assistant Scoutmasters, comprise the \"Old Goats\"
Patrol, which is headed by the Troop Committee Chair or his or her
designee (at campouts, that will often be the Goat Grubmaster).

The Goats are expected to operate by the patrol method, in part to serve
as a model for Scout patrols, and in part because the patrol method
works very well. See also the discussion in the \"Troop meetings\"
section of this Handbook about the need for the Goats to stay out of the
Troop meeting per se.

## Medications

Scouts who take medications should do so during Troop activities,
including campouts and summer camp. We know from experience that Scouts
who don\'t take their meds may well cause problems for themselves as
well as for other Scouts and adult leaders.

Parents should regularly update their Scouts\' medical forms with all
meds being taken or prescribed. Before departure for a campout, etc.,
each such Scout\'s parent should give the Scout\'s meds to the duty
Health and Safety Officer (HSO) in a plastic bottle clearly labeled with
the Scout\'s name and dosage information. (The duty HSO might, but might
not, be a physician, nurse, etc.) The HSO, in consultation with the
campmaster and PASMs, will decide how best to administer the meds. For
example:

• At Enchanted Rock, where patrols (except new Scouts) backpack out to
different sites in \"the back country,\" the HSO likely will give a
Scout\'s meds to one of the PASMs who will be with that Scout\'s patrol.

• At a merit‐badge summer camp where the whole Troop contingent camps
together, the HSO might decide to administer all meds him‐ or herself at
a series of Troop‐wide \"pill calls.\" No Scout should share any
prescription medication with any other person *(it\'s against the law),*
nor any other medication without permission of both Scouts\' parents.

## Meetings (Troop)

Scouts who miss a lot of meetings also miss out on the fun; they start
falling behind their peers in skill development; and often they
eventually drift away from Scouting entirely.

**Regular attendance at Troop meetings and activities is required for
advancement.**

Scouts should let their Patrol Leaders know when they will be unable to
attend a meeting or activity. Scouts who miss meetings are responsible
for obtaining any information they may have missed.

Scouts sit by patrol at Troop meetings.

The Scout Sign (ask your daughter to show it to you) is used to call for
order, quiet, and attention, and should be observed by both Scouts and
adults.

The Senior Patrol Leader (SPL) or one of her assistants might schedule
different patrols to act as \"service patrols\" for Troop meetings. The
service patrol typically sets up the Scout Room for the meeting;
conducts the flag ceremony at the beginning of the meeting; and puts
gear away after the meeting.

While any parent may observe the parent\'s Scout at any Troop activity,
our Scouts have consistently expressed the view that **adults should
stay out of the Troop meeting per se.** The Troop strongly encourages
parents who are not Assistant Scoutmasters (PASM)to instead attend adult
information and training sessions and visit with other adults outside
the Scout Room.

Any PASM or other adult who sits in on a Troop meeting should **take a
seat** in the back of the room -- don\'t stand or walk around in the
room -- and **remain quiet**.

## Merit Badges (for Scouts, parents, and adult leaders)

The guidelines below are based on the experiences of adult leaders in
Troops 54 and 55 and Scouts BSA documents *Guide to Advancement 2021*
(33088) -- section 7 (the Merit Badge Program) and *A Guide for Merit
Badge Counseling* (512-065). In all cases, the two guides are the final
authority if they address a specific issue.

\[See also the Merit Badge Counseling and Scout Responsibilities for
Advancement sections of this Handbook.\]

**Basic information**

Scouts wishing to advance in rank above First Class must earn a
specified minimum number of merit badges for each rank. Merit badges
work differently than Cub Scout activity badges and pins. Instead of
passing requirements with parents or den or pack leaders, Scouts pass
merit badge requirements with adult leaders registered as merit badge
counselors. Counselors might or might not be adult leaders in Troop 54.

There are more than 135 merit badges covering a range of outdoor skills,
life skills, hobbies, and careers. Some are designed to be of interest
to younger Scouts and others to older Scouts. The rank of Eagle requires
21 merit badges, with 14 of them prescribed.

The difficulty of a merit badge depends on the badge and on the age and
experience of the Scout. For instance, Backpacking and Environmental
Science are quite challenging, while Fingerprinting and some craft
badges are very easy. There are four basic categories of merit badges:

-   Life skills -- e.g., Personal Management, Citizenship in the
    Community

-   Scout skills -- e.g., Camping, First Aid, Pioneering, Orienteering

-   Careers -- e.g., Engineering, Law, Health Care Professions, American
    Business

-   Hobbies -- e.g., Stamp Collecting, Collections, Pets, Rifle
    Shooting, Canoeing

Note that the merit badges required for the rank of Eagle come from the
first two categories.

Youth Protection principles must be followed during all merit badge
activities. As a registered Scouter, the merit badge counselor must be
current in her or his Youth Protection Training and adhere to all
policies of Scouts BSA.

Scouts BSA policy requires that the Scout must hold a discussion with
the Scoutmaster to identify an approved counselor for the merit badge
work. That discussion is documented through adult leader approval in
Scoutbook or signature on the Application for Merit Badge *blue card*.
Because of the size of Troop 54, the Scoutmaster has delegated authority
to approve all merit badges to the Scout's PASM when the counselor or
merit badge class is approved by the Sam Houston Area Council. All other
counselors and offerings must be approved by the Scoutmaster.

Current requirements for each merit badge are available online at
*Scouting.org* and can be readily found using a search engine. Scouts
are encouraged to obtain and read the current pamphlet published by BSA
(available at the Scout Shop or Amazon.com) for the merit badge but
doing so is not a requirement. Troop 54 maintains a library of some
merit badge pamphlets available for use. Contact the Troop Librarian for
access to the pamphlets.

Merit badge requirements do change over time. Some troops maintain
libraries on the Internet of older versions of merit badge pamphlets,
available for free download. While the content of these older pamphlets
can be useful, Scouts must ensure they are working with the latest set
of requirements and not an older set. Merit badge counselors will only
accept work for the latest set of requirements.

Many merit badge counselors work with groups of Scouts by holding merit
badge classes on an occasional basis during the year. Announcements and
signups for merit badge activities are made generally by email, in the
troop newsletter, or by announcements at Troop meetings. Many merit
badges can be earned in a group setting at summer camp or in district or
council merit badge fairs.

Due to the nature of some merit badges, a Scout attending a merit badge
class at a summer camp, merit badge fair, or museum might complete only
a portion of the requirements for a merit badge. Under these
circumstances, the Scout should also identify the counselor she plans to
use to complete the requirements.

When the counselor is satisfied that the Scout has met each requirement,
the Scout should be sure to remind the counselor to approve all
requirements in Scoutbook or sign the blue card. In the case of a blue
card, the Scout is then accountable to turn in the *Application for
Merit Badge* portion of the blue card to the Troop Advancement Chair.
The Scout should notify her PASM or the Scoutmaster when the merit badge
is complete so that the requirements can be evaluated for completeness.
At the next Court of Honor, the Scout will receive the merit badge and
an achievement card.

Troop 54 strongly recommends that a Scout should not:

-   Earn more than three Eagle‐required merit badges with the same
    counselor

-   Earn more than five total merit badges with the same counselor

-   Earn any merit badge with the Scout's parent as counselor unless the
    Scout is part of a merit badge class of five or more Scouts

**Meeting Merit Badge Requirements**

A Scout cannot earn a merit badge merely by simply sitting through a
class. Each Scout must individually demonstrate to the counselor that
she has met each requirement for the badge. This can often be difficult
to do in a class‐type setting.

Each Scout is expected to follow the requirements exactly as stated in
the merit badge pamphlet---no more and no less. If the requirement says
*show* or *demonstrat*e, then just talking about the requirement or
watching it demonstrated is not enough. The same is true for words or
phrases such as *make*, *list*, *in the field*, *collect*, *identify*,
and *label*.

Worksheets for most merit badges are available through various online
resources. Merit badge counselors may ask you to use these worksheets,
and many do, but simply filling out these worksheets is not evidence
that the actual requirements were passed. The worksheets exist simply as
a tool to aid communication between the Scout and the counselor.

Neither a counselor nor the Troop may modify, add, or delete
requirements for a merit badge. Nevertheless, a Scout on his or her own
initiative may exceed the requirements.

There is no time limit for completion of merit badge requirements, as
long as the requirements are completed before the Scout's 18th birthday.
A Scout may work with more than one counselor on completing
requirements. For instance, a Scout might not complete all requirements
at a summer camp. Subsequent counselors may not, however, retest the
Scout on completed and documented requirements. To prevent confusion
when such situations arise, the Scout should keep all records associated
with the completed requirements to the extent possible and any issued
blue cards until the merit badge is approved as completed by the PASM or
Scoutmaster.

For practical advice about earning a merit badge, the following web
sites might be useful:

-   Boy Scouts of America
    ([[https://www.scouting.org/programs/scouts-bsa/advancement-and-awards/merit-badges/]{.underline}](https://www.scouting.org/programs/scouts-bsa/advancement-and-awards/merit-badges/))

-   Boy Scout Trail
    (<https://www.boyscouttrail.com/boy-scouts/merit-badges.asp>)

-   US Scouting Service Project
    (<http://www.usscouts.org/mb/mbindex.asp>)

**Working with a Merit Badge Counselor**

Counselors are volunteers and want Scouts to complete merit badges. Many
of them are parents of your fellow Scouts in Troop 54. They will do
their best to help you if you keep them apprised of your progress and
have patience with them in scheduling meetings. If you don't hear from a
counselor a few days after sending an email, please follow up with a
second email. Adults can get busy, or email can get lost, so do not
hesitate to try again.

As a cornerstone of Scouting, both counselors and Scouts must always
observe Youth Protection guidelines. Scouts and counselors must always
copy a parent or guardian on any communication. If a Scout wishes to
meet with a counselor for a one-on-one session, the Scout must plan to
include a parent in the meeting if a second adult will not otherwise be
present. If a second adult, whether parent or other, is not present,
expect the counselor to terminate the discussion and ask to reschedule
the meeting.

With the advent of video conferencing software such as Zoom, counselors
may ask Scouts to meet virtually rather than in person. This mode of
communication is acceptable but still subject to Youth Protection
guidelines.

**External Merit Badge Classes**

The Sam Houston Area Council has approved certain organizations to offer
merit badge camps or classes. For instance, the Houston Museum of
Natural Science offers selected merit badges using approved counselors
throughout the year.

Here are the signs of a good merit badge class or workshop:

-   Prerequisites are listed for requirements that should be completed
    before the class or for items that need to be brought to the class.

-   The sponsoring organization makes it clear which requirements cannot
    be completed at the class and must be done before or after the
    class. These should include requirements that require a log or diary
    kept over several weeks.

-   The sponsoring organization lists the resources that it will make
    available during the class.

-   If asked, the sponsoring organization can present evidence that the
    counselor is registered with the Sam Houston Area Council and is
    current on Youth Protection Training.

**Merit Badge Process**

1.  Ask the appropriate adult leader to initiate the process before
    beginning any merit badge.

-   PASM for merit badges offered by SHAC-approved counselors or
    organizations

-   Scoutmaster for merit badges offered outside of SHAC

> The adult leader will either approve beginning the merit badge in
> Scoutbook or issue a blue card.

2.  Identify in your request how you will be counseled for the merit
    badge by providing the following information:

-   Merit badge class or workshop

-   Merit badge counselor you identified on your own, who should be from
    the approved list of the Sam Houston Area Council (available in
    Scoutbook)

-   Merit badge counselor recommended by your PASM or Scoutmaster

> In rare cases, you might identify a counselor outside the Sam Houston
> Area Council. If so, please ask that counselor for the following
> information:

-   Evidence of approval to counsel the merit badge from another BSA
    council

-   Evidence of current Youth Protection Training

> Troop 54 leaders are unable to see this information in Scoutbook for
> counselors outside the Sam Houston Area Council. Only the Troop 54
> Scoutmaster may approve such counselors.

3.  You can begin work on a merit badge before you have a counselor, but
    the counselor makes the final decision on whether to accept it
    (which is why it's best to reach out to a counselor before you
    start). Once you have a counselor, the best practice is to meet at
    least twice with the counselor. The first meeting is to set
    expectations and to cover any requirements already completed. The
    second meeting is to complete all remaining requirements, especially
    if logs or journals are part of the requirements. Some Scouts do
    complete a merit badge in one sitting with a counselor, and some
    need more than two meetings.

4.  After you have completed all requirements, and a merit badge
    counselor has approved all of them in Scoutbook or on a blue card,
    you still need approval in Scoutbook or a signature on your blue
    card from your PASM or Scoutmaster. He or she may ask you for how
    you completed one or more of the requirements as a quality-control
    check.

-   Please retain all of your worksheets, essays, projects, logs, etc.
    until you have completed this step. Your PASM or Scoutmaster,
    however, will not retest you on any requirement.

-   If your PASM or Scoutmaster realizes that you are missing a
    requirement or were not asked to demonstrate a requirement, they
    will help you find a counselor to complete the requirement.

5.  If you go to a merit badge workshop or class and do not meet all of
    the requirements at the class, please ask your PASM or Scoutmaster
    to recommend a merit badge counselor to help you complete the
    remainder.

**Recommended Merit Badge Sequence**

Based upon the experience of Troops 54 and 55, Eagle‐required merit
badges and certain non‐Eagle-required badges are best earned at
different levels of physical and mental maturity. The troop recommends
approaching these merit badges in the following age‐appropriate
sequence. An asterisk (\*) indicates an Eagle‐required merit badge, and
a double asterisk (\*\*) indicates a merit badge that is one of several
choices in an Eagle‐required merit‐badge group (the list below is not a
comprehensive list of the non‐Eagle required badges).

> **Level 1 ‐ New Scouts, ages 11‐12, 5th‐6th grades**
>
> First Aid \*
>
> Swimming \*\* (best at Scout summer camp)
>
> Family Life \*
>
> Emergency Preparedness \*\* (First Aid MB required)
>
> Environmental Science \*\*
>
> Basketry
>
> Woodcarving
>
> Leatherwork
>
> Fishing
>
> Climbing
>
> Mammal Study
>
> Pets
>
> Dog Care
>
> **Level 2 ‐ First Class & Star, ages 12+, 6th‐7th grade up**
>
> Camping \* (7th Grade)
>
> Citizenship in the Nation \*
>
> Citizenship in the World \*
>
> Citizenship in the Community \* (7th Grade+)
>
> Cycling \*\*
>
> Cooking \*
>
> Environmental Science \* (7th grade+)
>
> Personal Fitness \*
>
> Sustainability \*\*
>
> Pioneering
>
> Canoeing
>
> Collections
>
> Geology
>
> Golf
>
> Home Repairs
>
> Law
>
> Medicine
>
> Nature
>
> Photography
>
> Radio
>
> Reading
>
> Scholarship
>
> Sports
>
> **Level 3 ‐ Star & Life, ages 14+, 8th‐12th grade**
>
> Communications \*
>
> Citizenship in Society \*
>
> Hiking \*\*
>
> Lifesaving \*\* (Swimming MB required)
>
> Personal Management \*
>
> Auto Mechanics
>
> Backpacking
>
> Rowing
>
> Wilderness Survival
>
> Whitewater

## 

## Merit Badge Counseling (for interested parents)

The guidelines below are based on the experiences of adult leaders in
Troops 54 and 55 and Scouts BSA guides *Guide to Advancement 2021*
(33088) -- section 7 (the Merit Badge Program), and *A Guide for Merit
Badge Counseling* (512-065). In all cases, the two guides are the final
authority if they address a specific issue.

**Introduction**

Every parent can help Scouts by serving as a merit‐badge counselor (MBC)
for one, several, or many merit badges. As a coach, the counselor
advises the Scout about steps to take to fulfill the badge's
requirements. As a counselor, he or she evaluates the Scout's
performance and determines whether the Scout has met the prescribed
objectives in the requirements.

**Requirements to Serve as a Counselor**

Merit badge counselors must be men and women of good character, age 18
or older, who are recognized as having the skills and education in the
subjects for which they are to serve as MBCs, as well as the ability to
work with Scout‐age girls and boys.

Merit badge counselors must be registered for that position with the Boy
Scouts of America (using the Adult Application form), in addition to any
registration as an adult leader with a troop. All merit badge counselors
must be approved by the Council advancement committee.

Merit badge counselors are not required to pay an adult leader
registration fee if they are only registered as merit badge counselors.

Merit badge counselors must complete the Youth Protection Training
course, either online or in person, and should also complete the \"This
is Scouting\" online training; see the *Training for Adult Leaders*
section of this Handbook for more details.

An older Scout (who is by definition not yet 18 years old) may assist an
adult merit badge counselor in teaching a merit badge subject. The adult
counselor, however, must verify that each Scout who works on the badge
has completed all requirements for the badge. This policy is the basis
for Scouts teaching merit badges at summer camps.

**Application Process for Merit Badge Counselor ("MBC")**

The process to become a merit badge counselor is straightforward but
does have a few quirks. Counselors are adult leaders who volunteer at
the Council level, not at the Troop or District level. Consequently,
even if you have registered as an adult leader with Troop 54, you need
to file a new *Adult Application* (form 524-541), which can be found at
the following link:

-   [[https://filestore.scouting.org/filestore/pdf/524-501.pdf]{.underline}](https://filestore.scouting.org/filestore/pdf/524-501.pdf)

Don't forget to initial the two certifications next to your signature.
SHAC might or might not perform another background check if you have
registered previously, but please sign the authorization for the check.
Also, you must attach a copy of your latest Youth Protection Training
certificate.

At one time, the application required you to specify that you were
registering for Position 42 -- Merit Badge Counselor, but that field has
been dropped from the latest form.

In addition to the *Adult Application*, you need to file a *Merit Badge
Counselor Information* form (form 34405), which can be found at the
following link:

-   [[https://filestore.scouting.org/filestore/pdf/34405.pdf]{.underline}](https://filestore.scouting.org/filestore/pdf/34405.pdf)

The following merit badges require specific certifications or training
to counsel:

-   Climbing

-   Snow Sports

-   Canoeing

-   Kayaking

-   Lifesaving

-   Motor Boating

-   Rowing

-   Scuba Diving

-   Small Boat Sailing

-   Swimming

-   Water Sports

-   Whitewater

-   Archery

-   Rifle Shooting

-   Shotgun Shooting

For any of these merit badges, please review section 7.0.1.1 of the
*Guide to Advancement* for specific requirements and note your
qualifications on the form. You should also consult the *Guide to Safe
Scouting* for specific activity requirements.

For other merit badges, you do not need to describe your qualifications
in elaborate detail, nor do you need to be an expert. A hobbyist level
of interest and competency is adequate in most cases. If you wish to
restrict yourself to counseling only Scouts in Troop 54 or in Twin Bayou
District, you can check the appropriate circle.

Once both forms are complete, you need to take them and a copy of your
YPT certificate to the front desk at the SHAC service center at 2225
North Loop West (at the intersection with T.C. Jester Boulevard). You
cannot submit your first round of forms by email.

If you wish to add merit badges to or drop them from your counseling
list, you can fill out another copy of the *Merit Badge Counselor
Information* form and either take it to the SHAC office or, more
conveniently, email it to the following email address:

-   [[576infomationregistration@scouting.org]{.underline}](mailto:576infomationregistration@scouting.org)

**MBC Training**

Online position-specific training is available for MBCs through the *My
Scouting* website, and new MBCs should take it at their earliest
convenience. The guides referenced in the beginning of this section are
also excellent resources for understanding better the role of MBCs.

**Restrictions on Counseling Badges**

There is no restriction or limit on the number of merit badges for which
an individual may be approved as a counselor.

Under BSA policy, a registered merit badge counselor may counsel any
Scout, including his or her own daughter, ward, or relative. Troop 54,
however, encourages adults not to counsel their own daughters except as
part of a class of at least five Scouts.

**Working with Scouts**

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| YPT guidelines for merit badge counseling are best implemented as     |
| follows:                                                              |
|                                                                       |
| -   Any discussion between a counselor and one or more Scouts must    |
|     occur within view of a second adult, whether in person or by      |
|     teleconferencing.                                                 |
|                                                                       |
| -   Is a second adult is within view but not within earshot of the    |
|     discussion, a single Scout must have a buddy.                     |
+=======================================================================+
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

The Scout should teach herself the necessary knowledge to the greatest
extent possible, using the merit badge pamphlet and other resources. One
of the benefits of the merit‐badge program is teaching Scouts to teach
themselves ("Give someone a fish, and you feed him or her for a day;
teach someone to fish, and you feed him or her for a lifetime.").

Encourage the Scout to develop a timetable of short‐ and long‐term goals
for completing the merit badge. An important objective of Scouting is to
teach Scouts to set goals for themselves and to plan and execute the
tasks required to reach those goals.

You might find that a Scout needs help in learning particular skills
that are required for the merit badge. Teaching those skills is a key
role of the MBC. A best practice in those cases is to use the Scouts BSA
EDGE method (Explain, Demonstrate, Guide, Enable).

If you stop hearing from a Scout who has started but not finished a
merit badge, follow up periodically to check on her progress and on her
plans for completing the requirements. Again, the Scout should be
setting goals; the counselor's job is simply to help the Scout achieve
those goals and confirm that she has done so.

Be supportive and not critical, but make sure the Scout has indeed
satisfactorily completed each requirement.

## Mission Statements

**Troop 54:** Troop 54 is an open organization with exceptional
resources dedicated to instilling in girls the values of the Scout Oath
and Law. Our mission is to help girls become responsible, compassionate,
self‐reliant citizens of God\'s world.

**Sam Houston Area Council:** Leading Youth to Lifelong Values, Service
and Achievement.

**Boy Scouts of America:** The mission of the Boy Scouts of America is
to prepare young people to make ethical choices over their lifetimes by
instilling in them the values of the Scout Oath and Law.

## Order of the Arrow

The Order of the Arrow (OA) is a national group of Scout honor campers,
based on brotherhood with fellow Scouts and cheerful service to others.
Its purpose is to (1) recognize those Scout campers who best exemplify
the Scout Oath and Law in their daily lives; (2) develop and maintain
camping traditions and spirit; (3) promote Scout camping; (4)
crystallize the Scout habit of helpfulness into a life purpose of
leadership in cheerful service to others.

The Order of the Arrow program is conducted through a separate lodge (in
Sam Houston Area Council, the Colonneh Lodge) under the jurisdiction of
the local BSA executive.

Scouts are nominated and elected to OA membership by their fellow Scouts
in their own troop. They must meet certain entry qualifications, which
include: hold a rank of First Class or higher, and have experienced 15
days and nights of Scout camping during the two‐year period prior to the
election. The 15 days and nights must include one, but no more than one,
long‐term camp consisting of six consecutive days and five nights of
resident camping, approved and under the auspices and standards of the
Boy Scouts of America. The balance of the camping must be overnight,
weekend, or other short‐term camps. More information on the OA can be
obtained by contacting the Troop\'s OA advisor or liaison, or by
visiting the lodge website at
[www.colonneh.org](http://www.colonneh.org).

## \"Org charts\"

**Troop 54 org chart**

• **Scouts** are organized into patrols, each headed by a **Patrol
Leader** (\"PL\"), a Scout who is elected by the other Scouts in the
patrol. New‐Scout patrols are coached by two older‐Scout **Troop
Guides** appointed by the Scoutmaster.

• The **Senior Patrol Leader** (\"SPL\"), a senior Scout, is the \"head
Scout\" of the Troop. She is elected at‐large by all Scouts in the
Troop. With the Scoutmaster\'s approval, the SPL appoints one or more
**Assistant Senior Patrol Leaders** (\"ASPLs\").

• The Patrol Leaders\' Council (\"Greenbar\") consists of the SPL; the
ASPLs; the PLs; and other Scout officers such as the Troop
Quartermaster, Librarian, etc.

• **Adult oversight** is provided by the Scoutmaster and Assistant
Scoutmasters, especially the Patrol Assistant Scoutmasters, all of whom
are appointed by the Troop\'s chartered organization with input from the
Troop Committee.

**BSA org chart**

• Troop 54, is a Scouts BSA Troop (for girls 11 to 17) chartered to St.
John the Divine Episcopal Church (\"SJD\"), the chartered organization,
is part of ...

• The Twin Bayou District, which is part of ...

• The Sam Houston Area Council (\"SHAC\"), which is part of ...

• The Southern Region, which is part of ...

• The Boys Scouts of America National office

## Patrol Assistant Scoutmasters (\"PASMs\")

*\[See also Scoutmaster and Assistant Scoutmasters.\]*

Most patrols in Troop 54, especially those with younger Scouts, have one
or two specially designated \"*Patrol Assistant Scoutmasters*\" or
\"**PASMs**\" assigned to work with them.

PASMs are not assigned to their own daughters\' patrols; this is so
Scouts can learn from other adults, and to maximize *Scout* (rather than
adult) leadership.

Typically, there is a \"lead\" experienced PASM, with other PASM\'s
working as a team. The role of the PASM\'s is described below.

**PASM duties with the patrol**

1\. Supervise Patrol Leader elections, and encourage a democratic
election of a Patrol Leader.

2\. Advise the Patrol Leader and hold her accountable.

> a\. Help her to remember to attend all the Patrol Leaders Council
> (PLC) meetings. If she cannot attend, help her assure that the
> Assistant Patrol Leader or another patrol Scout attends.
>
> b\. Help her to establish a telephone tree, group chat, etc for
> contacting all Scouts in the patrol.

3\. Assist the Patrol Leader in holding accountable the other Scouts in
the patrol, including advising her on her appointments of Assistant
Patrol Leaders, etc.

4\. For patrols of inexperienced Scouts, make use of Troop Guides to
advise the Patrol Leader, and advise the Scoutmaster regarding the Troop
Guide\'s performance in this important leadership position.

5\. Help the Patrol to prepare meaningful and interesting programs for
the Troop whenever the Patrol is assigned to be the program patrol.

6\. Help the Patrol to carry out its duties when assigned as the service
patrol. Remember:

> a\. cleanup of Scout Room after troop meetings;
>
> b\. assuring all Scouts in the Troop have rides home from the meeting.
> (Get a parent of a Scout in the Patrol to help with this.)

7\. Help the Patrol organize to conduct flag ceremonies and meeting
openings.

8\. Establish a fixed location for the patrol to hold its patrol
meetings during Troop meetings.

9\. Conduct, or help prepare for, Scoutmaster conferences as a critical
part of the advancement process:

> a\. *Scout through First Class Ranks*: Under the direction of the
> \"lead\" PASM, a patrol\'s PASM\'s conduct all Scoutmaster conferences
> for Scouts in the Patrol seeking advancement up through rank of First
> Class. Use the Scoutmaster conference to motivate Scouts for
> advancement, praise and critique their performance, hold them
> accountable for showing patrol participation and Scout Spirit, and
> assure satisfaction of rank advancement requirements, including
> regular troop and patrol activities, and active participation
> requirements.
>
> b\. *Star through Eagle Ranks*: Conduct a \"pre‐conference\" with
> Scouts in your patrol seeking advancement to Star‐ through Eagle
> ranks. Review with them the requirements for advancement --
> particularly fulfillment of their leadership position, Scout Spirit,
> and compliance with and knowledge of the Scout Law and Scout Oath.
> Then send them for their Scoutmaster conference to the Scoutmaster or
> his designee.

10\. When necessary, help the Patrol Leader maintain sufficient order
during Patrol and Troop meetings.

11\. Sit with the Patrol during Troop meetings and encourage other
PASM\'s assigned to the Patrol to do likewise.

12\. Encourage Patrol events/activities independent of the Troop, to
build Patrol spirit (e.g. a movie, game, or other activity).

13\. Using advanced Scouts and Troop Guides, teach First Class
Advancement to Scouts not yet First Class.

14\. Teach the Troop Camping Rules to patrol members and encourage
compliance with those rules.

15\. Privately discuss advancement, medical, and any disciplinary issues
with parents of patrol Scouts, the Troop\'s Health and Safety Officer,
and/or the Scoutmaster.

16\. Assist in selection of other Assistant Scoutmasters to work with
your Patrol. Help train these adults to take over your job by next year!
Encourage other adults to enroll in Boy Scout Adult Leader Training.

17\. Inform the Scoutmaster of problems and successes of the patrol and
its leadership.

18\. Preserve the authority of Scouts in the patrol, especially the
Patrol Leader, against the intrusions of adults not assigned to the
patrol. Direct parents of Scouts in the patrol toward instructing Scouts
that are not in the patrol.

19\. Recruit parents of Patrol members to assist in organizing \"fun\"
patrol activities away from the Troop, aid you with record keeping, and
to act as hall monitors at the Church and assuring that all Troop Scouts
have gotten rides home when your patrol is the service patrol.

20\. Attempt to maintain some uniformity of approach with other PASM\'s.

**The PASM job: On campouts**

21\. Personally attend as many campouts as possible.

22\. Maintain two deep leadership consistent with Youth Protection
Training

23\. Ensure that an PASM assigned to the patrol attends every campout
and is present each night of the campout. If no PASM assigned to the
patrol is available, recruit another PASM not committed to another
patrol for that campout.

24\. Require Patrol Leader to complete a duty roster in advance of all
campouts, and provide you with a copy, with definite assignments of all
patrol members attending.

25\. Require Patrol Leader to post the duty roster at the campout and
assist her in assuring its implementation.

26\. Ensure that an adult assigned to the patrol eats with the patrol on
campouts.

27\. Help make sure patrol members camp and tent together.

28\. Encourage proper cooking and cleaning methods.

29\. Using Troop Guides and more‐senior Scouts, teach safe and efficient
patrol campsite setup.

**\
**

## Patrol method

*\"The patrol method is not a way to operate a Scout troop, it is the
only way. Unless the patrol method is in operation, you don\'t really
have a Scout troop.\" ---Robert S. S. Baden‐Powell*

*\[See also \"Org Charts\" in this Handbook.\]*

**Parents and Scouts alike should carefully read** the BSA\'s discussion
of the patrol method on the Web.

A fundamental difference between Scouts and Cub Scouts is the greater
responsibility given to the Scouts (vs their parents). The Troop is
governed by a Patrol Leaders\' Council or \"PLC.\" The PLC comprises the
SPL, the Patrol Leaders from each patrol, troop guides, and certain
other Troop officers, such as the Assistant Senior Patrol Leaders and
Troop quartermasters.**\*** Guided by the Scoutmaster and Assistant
Scoutmasters, the PLC plans the yearly Troop program at the annual Troop
program planning conference. It then meets monthly, or more often if
necessary, to fine‐tune the plans for upcoming events.

(All Troop 54 parents are still encouraged and expected to be actively
involved in the Troop. *Everyone\'s* help is needed, because a Scout‐led
troop actually requires *more* work by adults. Volunteer opportunities
and appropriate training exist to match the interest and available time
of every adult.)

Parents should also make an effort to meet their Scout\'s Patrol Leader
and Troop Guides (if applicable) and the Troop\'s Senior Patrol Leader
(\"SPL\").

\* The PLC is sometimes known as the \"Greenbar,\" referring to the
green bars on the uniform sleeve patches worn by the SPL, assistant
SPLs, Patrol Leaders, and Assistant Patrol Leaders.

## 

## Prohibited items

The following items are prohibited on campouts, at summer camp, and at
meetings unless specifically authorized by the Scoutmaster on a
case‐by‐case basis:

• Fireworks or explosives of any kind

• Stoves

• Liquid‐fuel lanterns, or other liquid fuels of any kind

• Cigarette lighters

• Aerosol cans (of any kind)

• Sheath knives (of any kind or length)

• Folding knives with blade longer than four inches

• Electronic Devices (e.g. Radios, televisions, video games, **cell
phones**, MP3 players, electronic games)

• Tobacco, alcohol or illegal drugs

• Firearms or ammunition of any kind (including BB guns)

• Slingshots, clubs, spears, etc.

• Hatchets or axes

• Glass bottles

**Mobile Communication Device Policy**

Unless waived by the Scout Master or Trek Leader/Campmaster, Scouts will
NOT be permitted to:

A.  Use of phones and electronic devices while on Scout trips (i.e.
    weekend campouts, summer camp). However, Scouts can carry / use
    phones and electronic devices while in transport to/from those
    events, subject to:

    a.  Use while traveling must be appropriate for both the scout and
        others around her.

    b.  Scouts must turn-in their phones and electronic devices to the
        Scoutmaster upon arrival at camp. Scoutmaster will return at
        departure

    c.  Phones and electronic devices discovered at or during the event
        will be confiscated.

    d.  All confiscated devices will be returned only upon conclusion of
        the event / return to Houston.

    e.  Habitual violations will be addressed by the Scoutmaster.

B.  Use of phones and electronic devices during troop meetings,
    advancement sessions and in-town activities. They may only be used
    at the conclusion of the activity for communication with parents for
    pickup.

C.  Adult leaders should set an example for scouts by minimizing use of
    cell phones and electronic devices in all settings in public view.

## Scholarships

**Scholarship Committee**

The Scholarship Committee consists of (i) the current Troop Committee
Chair, Scoutmaster, and Troop Treasurer; (ii) one past holder of each of
these positions, each approved by the Chartered Organization; and (iii)
the Chartered Organization Representative.

**Troop scholarships**

**1. General scholarship philosophy.** Troop 54 will provide
scholarships, in accordance with these guidelines, for Scouts with a
genuine financial need, who could not participate in a particular event
without the Troop\'s financial assistance.

**2. Identifying scholarship candidates.** The Scoutmaster and PASMs
should make a positive effort, for each weekend campout and each summer
camp, to identify Scouts who cannot afford to attend such event. If a
Scout indicates that she will not be attending, and the Scoutmaster or
PASM suspects that the cost might be the main reason, they should ask
the Scout if she would be interested in being *considered* for a
scholarship.

**3. Adult leader input.** The PASM or Campmaster should advise the
Scholarship Committee of his or her recommendations concerning each
Scout who requests a scholarship. The Scholarship Committee may also
solicit input from other adult leaders to the extent it deems
appropriate.

**4. Dollar amount of scholarships.** Scholarships will normally be
provided for 50% of the cost of the event in question.

**5. Scholarships for weekend campouts.**

\(a\) Scholarships for weekend campouts, in cases of financial need, may
be awarded for the cost of campsite fees, activity fees, and the like,
along with the cost of transportation if applicable (for example,
charter‐bus fees). (b) Grub fees for weekend campouts will normally not
be eligible for scholarships (because the Scout\'s family likely would
have to spend at least that much to feed the Scout anyway).

**6. Summer‐camp scholarships.** Scouts will normally be considered for
summer‐camp scholarships as follows:

\(a\) *Merit‐badge camps:* Any Scout who has a financial need will
normally be awarded a scholarship for one merit‐badge camp per summer at
the geographically‐closest camp that the Troop attends.

\(b\) *High‐adventure camps:* If a Scout who has a financial need has
consistently been active in the Troop and demonstrated Scout spirit,
then on a case‐by‐case basis the Scout may be awarded a scholarship for
one high‐adventure camp per summer. Scholarships normally will not be
awarded for high‐adventure camps that are unusually costly; for example,
Blue Ridge or Packard likely would qualify for a scholarship but Alaska
probably would not.

**7. Other means of paying for camps.** All Scouts are encouraged to
participate in the Troop\'s fundraising opportunities, including the
sale of popcorn and Scout Fair tickets. Many of our Scouts have raised
hundreds of dollars from these sales that they could apply toward the
cost of summer camp.

**8. Adult scholarships.** Adult leaders will normally not be eligible
for scholarships.

**9. National Youth Leadership Training.**

\(a\) Any Scout, regardless of financial need, who attends SHAC\'s
one‐week National Youth Leadership Training course (\"NYLT\") shall be
reimbursed by the Troop for the NYLT fee upon request, because of the
benefit of NYLT to the Troop. Parents not having a financial need are
encouraged to have their daughters apply for reimbursement anyway (to
reinforce the message that NYLT is important to the Troop) and then to
make whatever donation to the Troop they feel is appropriate.

\(b\) Scholarships to the National Advanced Youth Leadership Experience
conducted at Philmont may be awarded on a case‐by‐case basis, taking
into account the Scout\'s level of consistent participation in the Troop
and demonstrated Scout spirit.

**10. Troop dues scholarships.** The Scholarship Committee may award
scholarships for Troop dues on the same general basis as provided above.

**11. Other scholarships.** The Scholarship Committee may award other
scholarships (including for Uniforms), consistent with prudent use of
Troop funds, when it deems such awards to be in the best interests of
the Troop.

**12. Confidentiality.** A Scout\'s request for a scholarship, and the
Scholarship Committee\'s consideration of and decision on the request,
should not be disclosed to other Scouts, and should be disclosed to
other adult leaders only on a need‐to‐know basis.

**13. Leadership / service projects.** The PASM of a Scout who receives
a scholarship should privately, informally, and tactfully encourage the
Scout to \"do something extra\" for the Troop as a way of giving back.
This should not be done in a way that might discourage Scouts from
seeking scholarship help.

**14. Eagle Scout Incentives**: to encourage the participation of older
/ highly trained scouts; the weekend campout costs are waived for Troop
54 Eagle Scouts. They do need to pay for any fees charged by the Camp
itself.

## Scout Shop

The nearest Scout Shop operated by the Sam Houston Area Council
(\"SHAC\") is at 2225 North Loop West, on the southeast corner of the
North Loop (inside the loop) and East T.C. Jester. (Google Map)

## Scoutmaster and Assistant Scoutmasters

The Scoutmaster is the adult leader responsible for the image and
program of the Troop. The Scoutmaster is appointed by the head of the
chartered organization with input from the Troop Committee.

The Scoutmaster\'s job is crucial, because the quality of the
Scoutmaster\'s guidance will affect every youth and adult involved in
the Troop.

Assistant Scoutmasters are appointed by the Scoutmaster with the
approval of both the Troop Committee Chair and the Chartered
Organization Representative.

Per BSA policy, the Scoutmaster and all Assistant Scoutmasters must
successfully complete the required BSA training for adult leaders.

*See also the \"Patrol Assistant Scoutmasters (\'PASMs\')\" section of
this Handbook.*

## Scoutmaster conferences

A **\"Scoutmaster conference\"** is a scheduled meeting between a Scout
with the Scoutmaster (or an Assistant Scoutmaster designated by the
Scoutmaster) to review a Scout\'s participation in the Troop.
Scoutmaster conferences are required for rank advancement and are in the
Scoutmaster\'s discretion for other reasons.

**Procedure:**

• The Scout, not her parents, should arrange all Scoutmaster
conferences.

• The Scout should appear in full Field (Class A) uniform and merit
badge sash, if applicable.

• **Scout, Tenderfoot, Second Class, and** **First Class rank:**
Scoutmaster conferences are conducted by a PASM assigned to the Scout\'s
patrol or the Scoutmaster.

• **Star or Life rank:** The Scout should first review her preparation
with her PASM, and then seek a conference with the Scoutmaster or, if
authorized by the Scoutmaster, a designated Scoutmaster Emeritus or
other Assistant Scoutmaster.

• **Eagle rank:** The Scout should first review her preparation with an
Eagle Advisor, then seek a conference with the Scoutmaster.

• If the Scoutmaster agrees that the Scout has completed the advancement
requirements, he/she will sign the Scout\'s Handbook in the place
provided, and the **Scout** should then promptly seek a Board of Review

## Service projects

Community service is an integral part of the Scouting program, designed
primarily to aid development of character and citizenship. Scouts are
required to take part in service projects for at least a specified
number of hours for advancement to Tenderfoot, 2^nd^ Class,1^st^ Class
Star and Life ranks. Scouts can earn creditable service hours for these
ranks by taking part in any the following:

• Troop service projects;

• Patrol good turns approved in advance by the Patrol Leaders\' Council
to help qualify a patrol for the National Honor Patrol Award;

• Eagle leadership service projects organized by Scouts who are working
on their Eagle rank (**participation in Eagle projects is particularly
encouraged**);

• Order of the Arrow service projects, other than those as part of a
Scout's Ordeal, and

• Other service projects, which **must be approved in advance** by the
Scoutmaster. Service to the Troop itself, such as cleaning the Troop
storage shed, do not qualify as service hours for rank advancement.
Scouts should not double count service hours for rank advancement, such
as those used for merit badge requirements, 50‐mile awards, school
requirements, or church requirements. Announcement of and sign‐ups for
service projects generally happen at Troop meetings, by email or Troop
newsletter, or via the Troop Website.

## Summer camp

Summer camp is a great time for advancement and practicing the patrol
method. Often our Scouts have their greatest leadership experiences and
earn memories for a lifetime at our summer camps.

• Troop 54 sponsored summer camps are those approved in advance by the
Troop Committee.

• Registration for summer camps is open to all Troop 54 Scouts who meet
the age and experience eligibility requirements for the program.

• Registration is sometimes limited in number, in which case it is
\"first‐come, first‐served\" among Troop 54 Scouts who are eligible.

**\"Merit badge\" camps**\
The Troop schedules at least one summer camp at a \"residence\" camp
geared toward First Class advancement and merit badge work. An example
of such a camp is the Sam Houston Area Council\'s Camp Strake near Cold
Spring in east Texas. **It is particularly important for new Scouts to
attend a merit badge summer camp,** although Scout of any age can
benefit. Excellent facilities are provided for difficult‐to‐obtain merit
badges such as Swimming, Canoeing, Rowing, Lifesaving, Environmental
Science, and several others. Attendance at summer camp may require
additional or updated medical forms, including a doctor's exam for the
BSA Medical Form Part C.

**"****High-adventure" camps**

The Troop schedules outstanding high‐adventure programs every summer,
including backpacking treks and often sailing, kayaking, climbing, and
other wilderness trips. Ideally this includes trips to Philmont Scout
Ranch in New Mexico for a two‐week wilderness backpacking experience.
Other camping adventures for older Scouts may involve the BSA Sea Base
in Florida; Northern Tier High Adventure Base; canoeing for ten days in
Maine; or backpacking in Colorado and Montana; or even Alaska above the
Arctic Circle. Troop 54 engages in a variety of these programs every
year

Many of these "high-adventure" camps require that the Scout meet the
relevant age limit and sometimes a minimum weight requirement by the
program start date. The age minimum for high‐adventure camps is
generally 13 or 14 (for Philmont it is 14). Attendance at high adventure
camp may require new or additional medical forms.

**Adult participation in summer camps**

New and experienced adult leaders are always needed for summer camps.
Merit badge camps are a wonderful opportunity for adults new to the
Troop who have completed the required training to \"break-in\" by
spending a week camping with a portion of the Troop. Adult registration
for summer camps works differently than for our Scouts. Adults who wish
to attend summer camps with the Troop should be aware of the following:

1\. All adults attending summer camp are required to complete adult
leader training.

2\. Selection of adult leaders for our summer‐camp programs is up to the
Scoutmaster, with the advice and consent of the Troop Committee Chair.

3\. The Troop endeavors to find summer camp leaders that understand and
accept the responsibility of providing a safe environment for Scouts and
can also guide a **Scout‐led** contingent; while being able to
effectively respond to emergencies; and know the applicable BSA
standards and commit to following them. Adult leaders for summer camp
must agree to demonstrate the principles of the Scout Oath and Law as
they represent the Troop for our Scouts and many others at camp and
during transit.

4\. The Troop usually receives a limited number of slots for
high‐adventure programs. We try to fill those slots with the maximum
number of Scouts and the minimum number of qualified adults needed for a
safe outing.

5\. Payment of deposits is required for adults, as it is for Scouts.
Payment of a deposit does **not** guarantee a slot for a particular
adult (if the adult is not selected to participate, the Troop will
refund the deposit).

6\. Adult participation in summer camps is **not** first‐come,
first‐served; it is a privilege, not a right. Adult‐leader selection,
especially for high‐adventure programs, takes into account such factors
as the following:

> a\. Completion of all training required to be an Assistant
> Scoutmaster;
>
> b\. Commitment to live and act in accordance with the Scout Oath and
> Scout Law. Active and regular participation in the Troop\'s monthly
> camping program;
>
> d\. Any prior participation in Troop 54 summer camps;
>
> e\. Demonstrated competence and training in skills desirable for the
> particular high adventure program, for example, Wilderness First Aid;
> Leave No Trace; First Aid / CPR, BSA or American Red Cross Lifeguard;
> whitewater canoeing;
>
> f\. Regular, successful prior experience as an Assistant Scoutmaster;
>
> g\. Demonstrated success in working with our Scouts and promoting a
> Scout‐led outdoor experience by all Scouts (including their own
> daughters);
>
> h\. Other needs of the Troop and of the particular program.

7\. In addition to the BSA required on‐line Youth Protection Training,
some summer camps, such as all those in Texas, may require additional
background-checks and/or in‐person YPT class.

> a\. Per YPT requirements, the minimum number of qualified adult
> leaders needed for a safe outing is three; with at least one being a
> female.
>
> b\. However, ideally, if the logistics can accommodate, Troop 54
> targets to maintain about five-to-one ratio of trained leaders to
> scouts at summer camp outings.

**Summer Campout rules**

The rules & policies governing Troop 54 scouts & adults at summer camp
are consistent with those outlined within this Troop Handbook for
weekend campouts & other troop activities. This includes, but is not
limited to: Campout Rules, Prohibited Items, Mobile Communications
Device policy, Uniform guidelines, Whom to contact, and all else.

## Troop Committee

The Troop Committee could be thought of as the \"board of directors\" of
the Troop. Its main responsibilities are (i) supporting the Scoutmaster
in delivering quality Troop programs, and (ii) handling Troop
administration. The Chair of the Troop Committee serves as something
like a non‐executive chairperson of the board. He or she is appointed by
the chartered organization with input from the Troop Committee. Troop 54
expects to have a very active Troop Committee, essentially all of whom
are parents and even grandparents of current Troop 54 Scouts. *All*
Troop 54 Scouts\' parents are encouraged to participate in the Troop
Committee. (Participating parents should register with the BSA as
committee members.) See the MeritBadge.org \"Troop Committee\" Web page
for a helpful discussion of the role of a troop committee and its
various subcommittees and positions. You may also wish to take the Troop
Committee Challenge online training.

## Uniforms

Each Scout is expected to wear their Scout uniform to every Scout
function. The official / full BSA uniform includes all the elements
described under Full Class A (or Field Uniform) in the table below. The
elements of the other uniform types, including the more informal Class B
(or Activity Uniform) are also outlined in the table below.

+-------+-------+-----+-------+------+-----+-----+---------+--------+
|       | **    | *   | **Sc  | **S  | *   | *   | **      | *      |
|       | Categ | *Sc | out** | cout | *Sc | *Sc | Troop** | *Merit |
|       | ory** | out |       | P    | out | out |         | Badge  |
|       |       | s   | **Br  | ants | Bel | S   | **Neck  | Sash   |
|       |       | hir | anded | (or  | t** | ock | erchief | (Optio |
|       |       | t** | T-Sh  | s    |     | s** | &       | nal)** |
|       |       |     | irt** | hort |     |     | Slide** |        |
|       |       |     |       | s)** |     |     |         |        |
+=======+=======+=====+=======+======+=====+=====+=========+========+
| Class | Full  | Yes |       | Yes  | Yes | Yes | Yes     | Yes    |
| A     |       |     |       |      |     |     |         |        |
+-------+-------+-----+-------+------+-----+-----+---------+--------+
|       | Pa    | Yes |       | Yes  |     |     |         |        |
|       | rtial |     |       |      |     |     |         |        |
+-------+-------+-----+-------+------+-----+-----+---------+--------+
| Class | All   |     | Yes   | Yes  |     |     |         |        |
| B     |       |     |       |      |     |     |         |        |
+-------+-------+-----+-------+------+-----+-----+---------+--------+

The uniform type worn for scout events is dependent on the formality of
the activity and a desire to maintain a clean and neat appearance of the
Field uniform shirt. Expectations on which uniform to where to which
activity / event are outlined below. BSA uniform guidelines state that
the scout uniform shirt must be tucked in.

+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| **Event /  | *   |      | **   | **Note**                          |
| Activity** | *Fi |      | Acti |                                   |
|            | eld |      | vity |                                   |
|            | (Cl |      | (C   |                                   |
|            | ass |      | lass |                                   |
|            | A   |      | B)** |                                   |
|            | )** |      |      |                                   |
|            |     |      |      |                                   |
|            | **  |      |      |                                   |
|            | "Fu |      |      |                                   |
|            | ll" |      |      |                                   |
|            | "P  |      |      |                                   |
|            | art |      |      |                                   |
|            | ial |      |      |                                   |
|            | "** |      |      |                                   |
+============+=====+======+======+===================================+
| Troop      | Op  | Yes  | No   |                                   |
| Meetings   | tio |      |      |                                   |
|            | nal |      |      |                                   |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| Courts of  | Yes | No   | No   | Add neckerchief/slide, socks,     |
| Honor      |     |      |      | belt, MB Sash optional            |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| S          | Yes | No   | No   | Add neckerchief/slide, socks,     |
| coutmaster |     |      |      | belt, MB Sash optional            |
| Conference |     |      |      |                                   |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| Boards of  | Yes | No   | No   | Add neckerchief/slide, socks,     |
| Review     |     |      |      | belt, MB Sash optional            |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| Campout    | Yes | Yes  | Yes  | Field for flags and travel at a   |
|            |     |      |      | minimum;                          |
|            |     |      |      |                                   |
|            |     |      |      | Activity for other vigorous       |
|            |     |      |      | activity                          |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| Service    | Op  | Yes  | Yes  | Depends on type of service work   |
| Project    | tio |      |      | performed                         |
|            | nal |      |      |                                   |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| Summer     | Yes | Yes  | Yes  | Field for flags, meals and        |
| Camp       |     |      |      | campfire ceremonies at a minimum, |
|            |     |      |      | Activity for other vigorous       |
|            |     |      |      | activity                          |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| Scout      | Yes | No   | No   | Neckerchief/slide, socks, Sash    |
| Sunday     |     |      |      | optional                          |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| Travel     | Yes | Yes  | No   | Includes travel to/from campouts, |
|            |     |      |      | summer camp                       |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| Hiking     | No  | Opti | Yes  | Need appropriate attire and       |
|            |     | onal |      | footwear for trail and weather    |
|            |     |      |      | conditions                        |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+
| Swimming,  | No  | No   | No   | One-piece swimsuit, swim shirts,  |
| Water      |     |      |      | quick dry shirts or other         |
|            |     |      |      | appropriate clothing for activity |
+------------+-----+------+------+-----------------------------------+

For other scout activities not mentioned above, wear the uniform
appropriate for the activity to maintain safety and as determined by
Scoutmaster

If wearing the uniform is impractical for whatever reason, then the
Scout should be dressed appropriately for the occasion. Appropriateness
will be determined by Scoutmaster with a focus on Safety, examples
include (but not limited to):

-   School uniform would be appropriate if (on limited occasions) it is
    not possible to change into scout uniform before an indoor meeting

-   Wearing proper clothes and gear for expected and probable conditions
    (no cotton, right shoes, and rain gear, etc.) would be appropriate
    for outdoor activities

All uniform questions or problems should be brought to the Scoutmaster's
attention. Habitual uniform problems will be handled by the Scoutmaster,
as deemed appropriate and necessary, including discussing the situation
with the Scout and/or Scout's parents

Uniforms can be purchased at the Scout Shop. The Troop provides one
embroidered Troop 54 neckerchief and one sew‐on name strip to each
Scout; each additional neckerchief costs approximately \$25.00, while
each additional name strip is \$10.00, subject to change.

## Troop 55

Troop 55 is a separate Scouting unit for boys ages 11 to 17. Like Troop
54, it is also sponsored by St John the Divine (SJD) as its chartered
organization. First chartered in 1933, Troop 55 has traditionally been
one of the largest, most successful Scout Troops in America. As an
example, in 2018 alone, Troop 55 had 240 Registered Scouts and 160 YPT
Adults and achieved 39 Eagle Scouts, 938 Merit Badges, 164 Board of
Reviews. Since 1933, Troop 55 has had over 700 Eagle Scouts.

## Venturing Crew 55

Venturing Crew 55 is a separate co-ed Scouting unit for older youths. It
also sponsored by SJD as the chartered organization, and has
traditionally had significant overlap with Troop 55 and Troop 54 in both
membership and adult leadership. Crew membership is open to young men
and women ages 14 through 20 who have completed 8th grade. Scouts may
and often do have dual registration in Troop 54 or Troop 55, and the
Crew.

For advancement purposes:

• Dual‐registered Scouts who seek to complete regular Scout advancement
in the Troop (instead of in the Crew) will be subject to Troop oversight
and requirements.

• Members of the Crew who seek regular Scout advancement in the Troop
must fulfill in the Troop at least the six months of leadership
necessary for advancement from Life Scout to Eagle Scout.

• All other regular Scout advancement requirements in Crew 55 members
will be fulfilled as established by the Crew Advisor (the equivalent of
the Scoutmaster), and overseen by the Crew Advisor or his designee.

Assuming completion of the foregoing, Troop approval of the Eagle Scout
project, and an Eagle Scout board of review at the Troop level, Crew
members will have the opportunity to participate in Troop‐administered
Courts of Honor, should they so desire. Venturing Crew members who are
not also current dues paying Troop members may be directly assessed
incremental costs associated with their participation.

## Glossary of Key Terms & Acronyms 

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Term**            **Acronym**   **Definition**
  ------------------- ------------- -------------------------------------------
  **Arrow of Light**  **AOL**       Highest rank in Cub Scouting. The only Cub
                                    Scout badge that may be work on Scout BSA
                                    uniform

  **Assistant         **ASM**       A trained volunteer Scouter, 18 or older,
  Scoutmaster**                     who helps the Scoutmaster by working with
                                    the troop and/or patrol of scouts

  **Assistant Senior  **ASPL**      A troop youth leader, usually in larger
  Patrol Leader**                   troops, who helps the Senior Patrol Leader
                                    with detail of his/her role

  **Be Prepared**                   The motto of Boy Scouting

  **Board of Review** **BoR**       A review held to with 3+ adults determine
                                    if a Scouts has satisfactory completed rank
                                    requirements (not re-test / more of an
                                    interview)

  **Buddy System**                  Pairing of 2+ scouts during activities and
                                    outings for safety reasons, particularly
                                    (but not only) aquatic activities

  **Campmaster**                    Adult who plans and organizes a weekend
                                    campout or summer camp for the troop. Often
                                    called the Trek Leader for a Summer camp

  **Chapter**                       A local district Order of the Arrow (OA)
                                    group

  **Chartered                       A religious, civic, educational
  Organization**                    organization that has applied for and
                                    received a charter to operate a scouting
                                    unit (SJD for Troop 54)

  **Chartered         **COR**       The lead manager of Scouting from a charter
  Organization                      organization who also represents that
  Representative**                  organization & it's units in the local
                                    council & district

  **Charter Renewal**               Annual process to update scout unit's
                                    roster and collect dues

  **Council**                       An administrative body responsible for
                                    Scouting in broad regional area (SHAC for
                                    Troop 54)

  **Council Service                 The business center for the regional
  Center**                          administration of Scouting

  **Court of Honor**  **CoH**       A recognition ceremony for those who have
                                    met the requirements for any Scouts BSA
                                    rank advancement, merit badges, or special
                                    awards

  **Den Chief**                     A scout who helps direct the activities of
                                    a Cub Scout den

  **District**                      A narrower regional administrative unit
                                    within a council (Twin Bayou for Troop 54)

  **District          **DC**        A group of key volunteer Scouters who work
  Committee**                       to ensure the success of their collective
                                    units

  **District          **DE**        A professional Scouter who works under the
  Executive**                       direction of the council scout executive to
                                    support units and act as an adviser to the
                                    volunteer leaders in the District

  **Eagle Advisor**                 An adult selected by the Troop Committee
                                    Chair to coach Life Scouts in their quest
                                    to complete their final Eagle Requirements

  **Eagle Scout**                   The highest rank for scouts

  **Grubmaster**      **GM**        Youth or Adult who plan, purchase, and
                                    prepare meals for their patrol at Campout.

  **Goats**                         The "Old Goats" is the adult patrol at
                                    campouts and other events

  **Junior Assistant  **JASM**      Appointed office open to Scouts 16 years of
  Scoutmaster**                     age and older

  **Key 3**                         The three key Leaders of Unit, District,
                                    Council, or National. At the unit level
                                    they include the Charter Organizaion
                                    Representative, Scoutmaster, and Troop
                                    Committee Chair

  L**odge**                         The local Council's Order of the Arrow (OA)
                                    group; made of Chapters from the Districts

  **Long-term                       A camping experience consisting of five or
  Camping**                         more consecutive nights in the outdoors

  **Merit Badge**     **MB**        A recognition given to a Scout for
                                    completing the requirements for the badge.
                                    Scouts BSA offers over 135 Merits Badges
                                    that teach life skills and introduce youth
                                    to many fields of interest & endeavor

  **Merit Badge       **MBC**       A registered adult volunteer who is expert
  Counselor**                       in a merit badge field, has the ability to
                                    work effectively with Scouts, and that
                                    certifies the requirements are met

  **Order of the      **OA**        Scouting\'s national honor society, the
  Arrow**                           members of which have been chosen by their
                                    peers for their Scouting spirit & camping
                                    ability

  **Patrol**                        A group of eight to twelve Scouts who
                                    belong to a Troop and work together in and
                                    out of the Troop meetings. There are
                                    usually several patrols in one Troop.

  **Patrol Assistant  **PASM**      An Assistant Scoutmaster assigned by the
  Scoutmaster**                     Scoutmaster to advise a specific Patrol and
                                    its Patrol Leader and/or Troop Guide

  **Patrol Leader**   **PL**        The youth leader of the patrol elected by
                                    its members

  **Patrol Leaders    **PLC**       The group of youth leaders who lead the
  Council**                         troop. It is headed by the Troop Senior
                                    Patrol Leader, her Assistant Senior Patrol
                                    Leaders, the Patrol Leaders of each of the
                                    Patrols in the Troop, plus other youth as
                                    in leadership positions. The Scoutmaster is
                                    the PLC's adviser

  **Philmont Scout    **PSR**       National high-adventure base covering
  Ranch**                           137,000 acres in northern New Mexico.
                                    Includes center for volunteer training.

  **Rank**                          Rank represents a Scout's advancement in
                                    the program. There are six ranks in Scouts
                                    BSA: Tenderfoot, Second Class, First Class,
                                    Star, Life and Eagle. A First Class scout
                                    is a "complete scout"

  **Registration**                  The payment of an annual fee, one of the
                                    requirements for membership in Scouts BSA

  **Sam Houston Area  **SHAC**      The regional administrative body
  Council**                         responsible for Scouts BSA in Troop 54's
                                    area

  **St Johns the      **SJD**       The Charter Organization for Troop 54 and
  Divine**                          other SJD units

  **Scout**                         Youth member of Scouts BSA; between ages of
                                    11 to 17.

  **Scouter**                       A registered adult member of Scouts BSA who
                                    serves in a volunteer or professional
                                    capacity

  **Scoutmaster**     **SM**        A commissioned volunteer leader of a Scouts
                                    BSA Troop; appointed by the Chartered
                                    Organization

  **Senior Patrol     **SPL**       The elected youth leader who runs the troop
  Leader**                          and chairs the Patrol Leaders Council
                                    (PLC), with the guidance of the Scoutmaster

  **Troop Committee** **TC**        The committee appointed by the Chartered
                                    Organization to administer the affairs of
                                    the Troop

  **Unit**                          Term used to designate any of the
                                    following: Troop, Crew, or Pack
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
